Image Classification 


Image Classification techniques are classified into two types :

a) Supervised learning :- The algorithm trained on labeled datasets
eg: Teaching a child by showing pictures of different animals and telling the names 

Process :
1) Define the Problem
2) Collect and Prepare Data
3) Collect and Prepare Data
4) Choose a Model
Split Data: Training and Testing
6) Train the Model
7) Evaluate the Model
8) Fine-Tuning
9) Make Predictions
10) Monitor and Maintain


b) Unsupervised learning :- The algorithm explores the data on its own identifying its own patterns and similarities

eg : Giving a child a collection of pictures without labels and letting them group similar ones based on their own observation 

Process :
1) Define the Problem or Objective
2) Collect and Prepare Data
Data Preprocessing
Choose an Unsupervised Learning Algorithm:  clustering algorithms (k-means, hierarchical clustering), dimensionality reduction techniques (PCA, t-SNE), and association rule learning.
5) Train the Model
Other process remains same



For Image classification most commonly used algorithm is Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs):





Different models created by python for image classification
1) VGG16 and VGG19:
Use Cases:
Ideal for recognizing general objects in images.
Suitable for tasks like identifying everyday items, household objects, and common scenes.


2) ResNet (Residual Networks)
Use Cases:
Excellent for recognizing detailed patterns in images.
Effective for tasks where you need to identify complex structures or objects with intricate features.


3) Inception (GoogLeNet)
Use Cases:
Well-suited for scenarios where objects may appear in different scales or orientations.
Good for tasks like identifying objects in cluttered scenes or with varying perspectives.

4) Xception
Use Cases:
Great for scenarios where you need a balance of accuracy and efficiency.
Suitable for image classification on devices with limited computational resources.


5) MobileNet
Use Cases:
Specifically designed for mobile and edge devices.
Perfect for tasks like real-time image classification on your smartphone.

6) DenseNet
Use Cases:
Useful for tasks requiring a comprehensive understanding of the relationships between different features.
Effective for identifying objects in images with intricate interdependencies.

7) EfficientNet
Use Cases:
Well-suited for situations where you want high accuracy without using too many resources.
Appropriate for various image classification tasks, balancing accuracy and efficiency.



8) ResNeXt
Use Cases:
Useful for tasks where you want to improve accuracy by capturing diverse patterns.
Effective in scenarios where a combination of different viewpoints is crucial.

9) SqueezeNet
Use Cases:
Designed for applications where you need a compact model with acceptable accuracy.
Ideal for real-time image classification on devices with limited storage.


10) NASNet (Neural Architecture Search Network)
Use Cases:
Well-suited for tasks where you want the model to automatically adapt its architecture.
Useful for image classification in dynamic environments with evolving requirements.


11) ShuffleNet
Use Cases:
Suitable for scenarios where computational resources are limited.
Effective for image classification in applications where efficiency is a priority.


12) Wide ResNet
Use Cases:
Ideal for tasks where you want to enhance model performance by increasing its width.
Effective for image classification in situations requiring a broader understanding of features.



Different types of algorithm used in image classification are as follows:

1) Convolutional Nueral Network(CNN) : CNNs have become the go-to architecture for image classification tasks. They are designed to automatically and adaptively learn spatial hierarchies of features through convolutional layers. Popular CNN architectures include AlexNet, VGGNet, GoogLeNet (Inception), ResNet, and more. 



2) Support Vector Machine(SVM) : SVM is a traditional machine learning algorithm that can be used for image classification. SVM finds the hyperplane that best separates different classes in feature space.

3) K-Nearest Neighbours (K-NN) : K-NN is a simple algorithm that classifies an input by finding the majority class among its k nearest neighbors in the feature space. 

4) Decision Trees and Random Forests : Decision trees split the input space into regions and assign a class label to each region. Random Forests, which consist of an ensemble of decision trees, are commonly used for image classification tasks.

5) Naive Bayes : Naive Bayes is a probabilistic algorithm that is based on Bayes' theorem. Despite its simplicity, it can be effective for certain image classification tasks.

6) Logistic Regression : Logistic regression models the probability that an instance belongs to a particular class. It can be used for binary classification tasks or extended to handle multiple classes.

7) Extreme Learning Machines (ELM) : ELM is a type of neural network with a single hidden layer of randomly generated neurons. It is known for its fast training speed and simplicity. 

8) Adaboost : Adaboost is an ensemble learning method that combines multiple weak classifiers to create a strong classifier. It can be used for image classification by combining the outputs of multiple classifiers.

9) XGBoost : XGBoost is a gradient boosting algorithm that has gained popularity for its high performance and scalability. It can be applied to image classification tasks as well.

10) Transfer Learning : While not a specific algorithm, transfer learning is a technique where a pre-trained model on a large dataset (such as ImageNet) is fine-tuned for a specific image classification task with a smaller dataset. This often leads to better performance.



Time Complexity and Space Complexity 

Time Complexity : The complexity is a measure of amount of time an algorithm takes to run with respect to its input size 

Example: Linear Search
Consider a simple linear search algorithm that looks for a specific element in a list. The time complexity of this algorithm is O(n), where 'n' is the size of the list.

Code :
def linear_search(lst, target):
    for element in lst:
        if element == target:
            return True
    return False

In this example, the time complexity is O(n) because the time it takes to complete the search is directly proportional to the size of the input list 'lst'. If the list is twice as long, the algorithm will take roughly twice as long to complete.


Space Complexity :  Space complexity is a measure of the amount of memory an algorithm uses with respect to its input size.

Example: Sum of Elements

Consider an algorithm that calculates the sum of elements in a list. The space complexity of this algorithm is O(1), constant space, because the amount of memory used doesn't depend on the size of the input.

Code :
def sum_of_elements(lst):
    total = 0
    for element in lst:
        total += element
    return total


In this example, the space complexity is O(1) because the algorithm uses a constant amount of memory (the variable 'total') regardless of the size of the input list. Adding more elements to the list doesn't require more memory.





Medical Documents :

1) Medical Records/Patient Charts
Insurance Claims and Billing Documents
3) Prescription and Medication Records
4) Consent Forms
5) Medical Certificates
6) Healthcare Policies and Procedures
7) Medical Reports and Referral Letters
8) HIPAA Compliance Documents
9) Emergency Response Plans





Code explanations :

code 1: datagen = ImageDataGenerator(rescale=1./255, shear_range=0.2, zoom_range=0.2, horizontal_flip=True, validation_split=0.2)

1) rescale=1./255 :- This means that the pixel values of the images will be scaled down by a factor of 1/255. It's a common practice to normalize pixel values to be in the range [0, 1].

2) shear_range=0.2 :- It introduces shearing transformations, which slant the image along a certain axis.

3) zoom_range=0.2 :- This allows random zooming in on the images by a factor of up to 0.2.

4) horizontal_flip=True :-  It randomly flips images horizontally, which can augment the dataset and make the model more robust.

5) validation_split=0.2 :-  This splits the dataset into training and validation sets, reserving 20% of the data for validation. This is useful for assessing the model's performance on data it hasn't seen during training.

In simpler terms, this line of code is preparing a tool (ImageDataGenerator) to process and augment a collection of images for training a machine learning model, making the model more adaptable and effective.


Code 2: train_generator = datagen.flow_from_directory(data_dir, target_size=(256, 256), batch_size=32, class_mode='categorical', subset='training')

1) datagen :- This is the ImageDataGenerator you defined earlier, specifying how the training data should be augmented.

2) .flow_from_directory(data_dir, target_size=(256, 256), batch_size=32, class_mode='categorical', subset='training') :- This function generates batches of augmented data from a directory. Let's look at each parameter:





a) data_dir :- This is the path to the directory containing the training images

b) target_size=(256, 256) :-  It resizes the images to have a height and width of 256 pixels.

c) batch_size=32 :- It specifies that each batch of training data should contain 32 images.

d) class_mode='categorical' :- This indicates that the labels for the images are categorical, meaning they represent different classes. This is common in classification tasks where each image belongs to a specific category.

e) subset='training' :- It tells the generator to use the subset of the data designated for training. This is related to the validation split you specified in the ImageDataGenerator, where 20% of the data was reserved for validation, and the remaining 80% is used for training

In summary, this line of code is creating a generator specifically for the training data. It takes images from a specified directory, applies the data augmentation transformations defined in datagen, and organizes the data into batches for training a machine learning model.



Code 3 : val_generator = datagen.flow_from_directory(data_dir_test, target_size=(256, 256), batch_size=32, class_mode='categorical', subset='validation')

1) datagen :- This is the same ImageDataGenerator defined earlier, specifying how the validation data should be processed.

2) .flow_from_directory(data_dir_test, target_size=(256, 256), batch_size=32, class_mode='categorical', subset='validation') :- This function is similar to the one used for training data. Let's look at each parameter

a) data_dir_test : - This is the path to the directory containing the validation images. It's a separate directory from the one used for training data.

b) target_size=(256, 256) :-  It resizes the validation images to have a height and width of 256 pixels. This should match the target size used for training data.

c) batch_size=32 :- It specifies that each batch of validation data should contain 32 images. This should be consistent with the batch size used for training data.

d) class_mode='categorical’ :- This indicates that, like in training, the labels for the validation images are categorical, representing different classes.

e)  subset='validation' : It tells the generator to use the subset of the data designated for validation. This is related to the validation split specified in the ImageDataGenerator during training.


In summary, this line of code is creating a generator specifically for the validation data. It takes images from a different directory, applies the same data augmentation transformations defined in datagen, and organizes the data into batches for evaluating the model's performance on unseen data.



Batch Size : The batch size is a hyperparameter that determines the number of samples processed in each iteration during training. It can affect both the training speed and memory usage. Choosing an appropriate batch size depends on various factors, including the available computational resources, the size of your dataset, and the architecture of your neural network. There's no one-size-fits-all answer, and it often involves some experimentation.

Here are some considerations:
1) Larger Batch Size:
Pros: Generally speeds up training as more samples are processed in parallel.
Cons: Requires more memory; might not fit on GPUs with limited memory.

2) Smaller Batch Size:
Pros: Requires less memory; may converge faster and generalize better in some cases.
Cons: Slower training due to fewer samples processed in parallel.



Code 4 : 
model = Sequential()
model.add(Conv2D(32, (3, 3), activation='relu', input_shape=(256, 256, 3)))
model.add(MaxPooling2D(pool_size=(2, 2)))
model.add(Conv2D(64, (3, 3), activation='relu'))
model.add(MaxPooling2D(pool_size=(2, 2)))
model.add(Flatten())
model.add(Dense(128, activation='relu'))
model.add(Dropout(0.5))
model.add(Dense(len(class_names1), activation='softmax'))

1) model = Sequential() :  This initializes a sequential model, which is a linear stack of layers. In a sequential model, you can add one layer at a time in a step-by-step fashion.

2) model.add(Conv2D(32, (3, 3), activation='relu', input_shape=(256, 256, 3))) : 
Adds a convolutional layer with 32 filters of size (3, 3).
Uses the ReLU (Rectified Linear Unit) activation function, which introduces non-linearity.
input_shape=(256, 256, 3) specifies that the input should have a shape of (256, 256, 3), where 3 is for the RGB color channels.


3) model.add(MaxPooling2D(pool_size=(2, 2))) :-  Adds a max-pooling layer with a pool size of (2, 2). Max-pooling reduces the spatial dimensions of the data.

4) model.add(Conv2D(64, (3, 3), activation='relu')) :- Adds another convolutional layer with 64 filters of size (3, 3). Again, uses the ReLU activation function

5) model.add(MaxPooling2D(pool_size=(2, 2))) :- Adds another max-pooling layer with a pool size of (2, 2).

6) model.add(Flatten()) : Adds a flatten layer, which converts the multi-dimensional output to a one-dimensional array. This is necessary before feeding the data into dense layers

7) model.add(Dense(128, activation='relu')) : Adds a fully connected (dense) layer with 128 neurons. Uses the ReLU activation function.

8) model.add(Dropout(0.5)) :- Adds a dropout layer with a dropout rate of 0.5. Dropout is a regularization technique that helps prevent overfitting by randomly setting a fraction of input units to zero during training

9) model.add(Dense(len(class_names1), activation='softmax')) :- Adds the final fully connected (dense) layer with a number of neurons equal to the number of classes in your dataset (len(class_names1)). Uses the softmax activation function, which is common for multi-class classification problems. It converts the model's raw output into class probabilities.

In summary, this code defines a CNN architecture with convolutional and pooling layers, followed by fully connected layers for image classification. The ReLU activation function introduces non-linearity, and dropout helps prevent overfitting. The final layer uses softmax activation for multi-class classification.


Sequential : A Sequential model in Keras is a linear stack of layers where you can add one layer at a time. It represents a simple and straightforward neural network architecture, where each layer flows sequentially from the previous one. This type of model is appropriate for most common use cases, such as feedforward neural networks and simple convolutional neural networks (CNNs).


In summary, your model processes input images through convolutional and pooling layers to extract features, flattens the output, passes it through fully connected layers, and produces class probabilities at the output layer using the softmax activation function. The class with the highest probability is considered the predicted class during inference.


model.compile(optimizer='adam', loss='categorical_crossentropy', metrics=['accuracy'])
a) model.compile is a method in Keras that configures the model for training.
b) It takes several important parameters:
optimizer='adam': This specifies the optimization algorithm to use during training. 'adam' is a popular optimization algorithm that adapts the learning rate during training.

b) loss='categorical_crossentropy': This is the loss function that the model will minimize during training. For multi-class classification problems with one-hot encoded labels, 'categorical_crossentropy' is commonly used.

c) metrics=['accuracy']: This defines the evaluation metric(s) used to monitor the training and validation performance. In this case, it's tracking the accuracy of the model.




				PLSQL Assignment

Q1. Create Table Students with following fields & Write 2 insert statements for it.
RollNo integer 10 => Auto Increment
FName string 50
LName string 50
DOB Date => Date of Birth
Add1 string 150
Add2 String 150
City String 100
State String 100
Pin String 10
Class String 10 => class in which student is studying
First field will be used as a unique identifier for the record.
Solution : 
CREATE TABLE Students (
    RollNo NUMBER(10) GENERATED ALWAYS AS IDENTITY PRIMARY KEY,
    FName VARCHAR2(50),
    LName VARCHAR2(50),
    DOB DATE,
    Add1 VARCHAR2(150),
    Add2 VARCHAR2(150),
    City VARCHAR2(100),
    State VARCHAR2(100),
    Pin VARCHAR2(10),
    Class VARCHAR2(10)
);

INSERT INTO Students (FName, LName, DOB, Add1, Add2, City, State, Pin, Class)
VALUES ('Mihir', 'Narkar', TO_DATE('2001-08-19', 'YYYY-MM-DD'), '123 Main Street', 'Apt 4B', 'New York', 'NY', '10001', '10A');

INSERT INTO Students (FName, LName, DOB, Add1, Add2, City, State, Pin, Class)
VALUES ('Srushti', 'Pagare', TO_DATE('2001-02-02', 'YYYY-MM-DD'), '789 Oak Lane', 'Apt 2C', 'Chicago', 'IL', '60601', '9B');

select * from students;

Output : 




Q2. Create table Subjects with following fields & Write 2 insert statements for it.
SubID integer 10 => Auto Increment
SubName String 100
First field will be used as a unique identifier for the record.
Solution : 
CREATE TABLE Subjects (
    SubID NUMBER(10) GENERATED ALWAYS AS IDENTITY PRIMARY KEY,
    SubName VARCHAR2(100)
);

INSERT INTO Subjects (SubName)
VALUES ('Mathematics');

INSERT INTO Subjects (SubName)
VALUES ('Science');

SELECT * FROM Subjects;

Output : 




Q.3)   Create a PL/SQL Procedure SP_Exam_result which should accept exam date as parameter and should create the records for each Student and each Subject in Exams table automatically assuming that all the exams were conducted on the same date. The MarksFrom field should be having value as 100. The MarksObtained field should have random values generated using following function.
ROUND(DBMS_RANDOM.VALUE(30,100))




Solution : 


CREATE OR REPLACE PROCEDURE SP_Exam_result (p_exam_date DATE) AS
BEGIN
    FOR student_record IN (SELECT RollNo FROM Students) LOOP
        FOR subject_record IN (SELECT SubID FROM Subjects) LOOP
            INSERT INTO Exams (ExamDate, RollNo, SubID, MarksObtained, MarksFrom)
            VALUES (p_exam_date, student_record.RollNo, subject_record.SubID, ROUND(DBMS_RANDOM.VALUE(30, 100)), 100);
        END LOOP;
    END LOOP;
END SP_Exam_result;


BEGIN
    SP_Exam_result(TO_DATE('2023-09-10', 'YYYY-MM-DD')); -- Replace with your desired exam date
END;

select * from exams;


Output : 



Q4. Create a PL/SQL Procedure SP_Exam_result which should accept exam date as parameter and should create the records for each Student and each Subject in Exams table automatically assuming that all the exams were conducted on the same date. The MarksFrom field should be having value as 100. The MarksObtained field should have random values generated using following function.
ROUND(DBMS_RANDOM.VALUE(30,100))
Solution :


CREATE OR REPLACE PROCEDURE SP_Exam_result(p_exam_date DATE) AS
BEGIN
    FOR student_rec IN (SELECT RollNo FROM Students) LOOP
        FOR subject_rec IN (SELECT SubID FROM Subjects) LOOP
            -- Check if a record already exists with the same combination of values
            BEGIN
                INSERT INTO Exams (ExamDate, RollNo, SubID, MarksObtained, MarksFrom)
                VALUES (p_exam_date, student_rec.RollNo, subject_rec.SubID, ROUND(DBMS_RANDOM.VALUE(30, 100)), 100);
            EXCEPTION
                WHEN DUP_VAL_ON_INDEX THEN
                    -- Handle the exception (record already exists)
                    NULL;
            END;
        END LOOP;
    END LOOP;
    COMMIT;
END SP_Exam_result;


BEGIN
    SP_Exam_result(TO_DATE('2023-09-10', 'YYYY-MM-DD')); -- Replace with your desired exam date
END;


// Retrieve all exam results for a specific exam date:

SELECT * FROM Exams
WHERE ExamDate = TO_DATE('2023-09-10', 'YYYY-MM-DD');
Output : 


//  Retrieve exam results for a specific student for a given exam date:

SELECT * FROM Exams
WHERE ExamDate = TO_DATE('2023-09-10', 'YYYY-MM-DD') 
AND RollNo = 2; 


Output : 






Q5. Using SP_Exam_result create exam results for exams date 31-Aug-2018, 30-Nov-2018, 28-Feb-2019 and 15-May-2019. Write calls to SP_Exam_result procedure.


Solution : 

BEGIN
    SP_Exam_result(TO_DATE('2018-08-31', 'YYYY-MM-DD'));
END;


BEGIN
    SP_Exam_result(TO_DATE('2018-11-30', 'YYYY-MM-DD'));
END;


BEGIN
    SP_Exam_result(TO_DATE('2019-02-28', 'YYYY-MM-DD'));
END;


BEGIN
    SP_Exam_result(TO_DATE('2019-05-15', 'YYYY-MM-DD'));
END;
Select * from exams ;



Output : 












Q6. Write SQL query to generate output as given below for the students by adding up all the marks for the Student for each Subject

Solution : 

SELECT
    s.RollNo AS "Roll No.",
    s.FName || ' ' || s.LName AS "Student Full Name",
    'Mathematics' AS "Subject Name",
    MAX(CASE WHEN sub.SubName = 'Mathematics' THEN e.MarksObtained ELSE NULL END) AS "Marks1",
    MAX(CASE WHEN sub.SubName = 'Mathematics' THEN e.MarksObtained ELSE NULL END) AS "Marks2",
    MAX(CASE WHEN sub.SubName = 'Mathematics' THEN e.MarksObtained ELSE NULL END) AS "Marks3",
    MAX(CASE WHEN sub.SubName = 'Mathematics' THEN e.MarksObtained ELSE NULL END) AS "Marks4",
    SUM(CASE WHEN sub.SubName = 'Mathematics' THEN e.MarksObtained ELSE NULL END) AS "Total",
    ROUND((SUM(CASE WHEN sub.SubName = 'Mathematics' THEN e.MarksObtained ELSE NULL END) / 400) * 100, 2) AS "%"
FROM
    Students s
JOIN
    Exams e ON s.RollNo = e.RollNo
JOIN
    Subjects sub ON e.SubID = sub.SubID
WHERE
    sub.SubName = 'Mathematics'
GROUP BY
    s.RollNo, s.FName, s.LName
UNION ALL
SELECT
    s.RollNo AS "Roll No.",
    s.FName || ' ' || s.LName AS "Student Full Name",
    'Science' AS "Subject Name",
    MAX(CASE WHEN sub.SubName = 'Science' THEN e.MarksObtained ELSE NULL END) AS "Marks1",
    MAX(CASE WHEN sub.SubName = 'Science' THEN e.MarksObtained ELSE NULL END) AS "Marks2",
    MAX(CASE WHEN sub.SubName = 'Science' THEN e.MarksObtained ELSE NULL END) AS "Marks3",
    MAX(CASE WHEN sub.SubName = 'Science' THEN e.MarksObtained ELSE NULL END) AS "Marks4",
    SUM(CASE WHEN sub.SubName = 'Science' THEN e.MarksObtained ELSE NULL END) AS "Total",
    ROUND((SUM(CASE WHEN sub.SubName = 'Science' THEN e.MarksObtained ELSE NULL END) / 400) * 100, 2) AS "%"
FROM
    Students s
JOIN
    Exams e ON s.RollNo = e.RollNo
JOIN
    Subjects sub ON e.SubID = sub.SubID
WHERE
    sub.SubName = 'Science'
GROUP BY
    s.RollNo, s.FName, s.LName
ORDER BY
    "Roll No.", "Subject Name";





Output : 






Q7. Store the above out put in a table called Results.

Solution : 


CREATE TABLE Results AS
SELECT
    s.RollNo AS "Roll No.",
    s.FName || ' ' || s.LName AS "Student Full Name",
    sub.SubName AS "Subject Name",
    MAX(CASE WHEN sub.SubName = 'Mathematics' THEN e.MarksObtained ELSE NULL END) AS "Marks1",
    MAX(CASE WHEN sub.SubName = 'Science' THEN e.MarksObtained ELSE NULL END) AS "Marks2",
    MAX(CASE WHEN sub.SubName = 'Mathematics' THEN e.MarksObtained ELSE NULL END) AS "Marks3",
    MAX(CASE WHEN sub.SubName = 'Science' THEN e.MarksObtained ELSE NULL END) AS "Marks4",
    SUM(CASE WHEN sub.SubName = 'Mathematics' THEN e.MarksObtained ELSE NULL END) +
    SUM(CASE WHEN sub.SubName = 'Science' THEN e.MarksObtained ELSE NULL END) AS "Total",
    ROUND((SUM(CASE WHEN sub.SubName IN ('Mathematics', 'Science') THEN e.MarksObtained ELSE NULL END) / 400) * 100, 2) AS "%"
FROM
    Students s
JOIN
    Exams e ON s.RollNo = e.RollNo
JOIN
    Subjects sub ON e.SubID = sub.SubID
WHERE
    sub.SubName IN ('Mathematics', 'Science')
GROUP BY
    s.RollNo, s.FName, s.LName, sub.SubName;


Select * from results;








Q8. Write a query to find out the total highest mark scorer for each subject.


Solution : 

WITH SubjectScores AS (
    SELECT
        sub.SubName AS "Subject Name",
        s.RollNo AS "Roll No.",
        s.FName || ' ' || s.LName AS "Student Full Name",
        e.MarksObtained AS "Marks"
    FROM
        Students s
    JOIN
        Exams e ON s.RollNo = e.RollNo
    JOIN
        Subjects sub ON e.SubID = sub.SubID
)
SELECT
    "Subject Name",
    "Roll No.",
    "Student Full Name",
    "Marks"
FROM
    (
        SELECT
            "Subject Name",
            "Roll No.",
            "Student Full Name",
            "Marks",
            RANK() OVER (PARTITION BY "Subject Name" ORDER BY "Marks" DESC) AS Rank
        FROM
            SubjectScores
    )
WHERE
    Rank = 1;



Output: 




See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/339443520
Water in Trees An essay on astonishing processes, structures and periodicities
Article · February 2020
DOI: 10.13128/Substantia-507
CITATION
1
READS
1,761
1 author:
Ernst Rudolf Zürcher
Bern University of Applied Sciences
25 PUBLICATIONS   290 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Ernst Rudolf Zürcher on 23 February 2020.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Firenze University Press
www.fupress.com/substantia
Substantia
An International Journal of the
History of Chemistry
OPEN ACCESS
Water in Trees
An essay on astonishing processes, structures 
and periodicities
Ernst Zürcher
Dr. sc. nat., Forestry engineer ETHZ, Professor em. for Wood Science Bachelor & Master 
Wood, Bern University of Applied Sciences, Architecture, Wood and Civil Engineering 
Solothurnstrasse 102, P.O. Box, CH-2500 Biel-Bienne 6  |    Email : ernst.zuercher@bfh.ch
Abstract. This essay shows that the relations between water and trees 
have far-reaching, unexpected aspects and consequences.  The local 
and the global terrestrial water cycles are directly or indirectly linked 
to the presence of trees and forests. A more precise consideration of 
photosynthesis reveals that this process is not only producing biomass 
and oxygen, but is also the place of water synthesis. This newly formed 
water probably shows properties according to the new water-paradigma 
proposed by G. Pollack (2013). This must also be the case for the 
water absorbed in the soil and flowing upwards through capillar wood 
structures, forming vortices at the microscopic cellular and at the 
macroscopic tree level. Another lesser-known phenomenon is linked 
to periodical changes in the wood-water relation, according not only 
to the solar influence (photoperiodism, seasonality), but also to more 
subtle lunar rythmicities having an effect on wood properties. This last 
aspect represents a kind of rehabilitation of traditional practices often 
considered as mere superstitions.  
Keywords.  Water cycle, photosynthesis, water synthesis, wood structure, 
vortices, lunar rythmicities.
WATER AT THE CENTER OF THE FUNDAMENTAL 
PROCESS OF LIFE 
 
Photosynthesis is the common process to all plants, but trees, due 
to their outreaching dimensions and to the formation of forests in specific 
multispecies associations, perform 2/3 of the global photosynthesis on 
earth. A closer study of this process reveals that there is a hidden face of 
photosynthesis. In many textbooks or even dictionaries, an uncomplete 
equation of photosynthesis is still usual, which is misleading for a correct 
understanding of the most important physiological process making life 
Citation: E. Zürcher (2019) Water 
in Trees - An essay on astonishing 
processes, structures and periodi-
cities. Substantia 3(2) Suppl.3: ??-
??. DOI: 10.13128/Substantia-507
Copyright: © 2019 E. Zürcher. This 
is an open access, peer-reviewed 
article published by Firenze Uni-
versity Press (http://www.fupress.
com/substantia) and distributed 
under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution License, whi-
ch permits unrestricted use, distri-
bution, and reproduction in any me-
dium, provided the original author 
and source are credited.
Data Availability Statement: All 
relevant data are within the paper 
and its Supporting Information files.
Competing Interests: The Au-
thor(s) declare(s) no conflict of in-
terest.
Substantia. An International Journal of the History of Chemistry 3(2) Suppl. 3: ???-???, 2019
ISSN: 2532-3997 | DOI: 10.13128/Substantia-507

76
the reaction can be shown by using colours and bold 
type:
possible on earth. Effectively, following equation is 
often figuring: 
“6 molecules of carbon dioxide + 6 molecules of water 
+ light → 1 molecule glucose + 6 molecules oxygen”
6CO2 + 6H2O       ------>      C6H12O6 + 6O2
Sunlight energy 
  Where: CO2 = carbon dioxide 
H2O = water
Light energy is required
C6H12O6 = glucose
O2 = oxygen
 
The 
researcher 
who 
finally 
refutes 
this incomplete and tenacious portrayal is the 
microbiologist Cornelis Van Niel (1897 – 1985) 
of Stanford University, following work as a young 
student on the photosynthetic activities of various 
types of bacteria. One particular group of these – the 
purple sulphurous bacteria (Thiorhodobactéries) – is 
capable of reducing the CO2 into carbohydrates, in an 
atmosphere devoid of oxygen (anaerobic conditions) 
and without emission of oxygen. The substrate 
necessary here is not water H2O, but hydrogen 
sulphide H2S. What is released by the process, on the 
other hand, in addition to the carbohydrates, is water 
H2O and elemental sulphur S2 accumulated in the 
globules within the bacteria and identifiable under 
a microscope. Van Niel did not stop here and he 
extrapolated his discovery by proposing a generalised 
equation for photosynthesis. This came down to 
affirming that the source of the oxygen produced by 
chlorophyllian photosynthesis was in fact the water 
and not the carbon dioxide.
 
This brilliant speculation put forward in 
the 1930's received its proof in the following decade 
when researchers from Berkeley used a heavy 
isotope of oxygen (18O) to mark the water molecule 
entering the reaction. Result: the oxygen released 
comes exclusively from the H2O molecule. In terms 
of process, this comes down to understanding that 
the primary action of the sun's rays in photosynthesis 
consists of the splitting or photolysis of water. The 
newly produced water takes its oxygen from the 
carbon dioxide absorbed (Ray 1972;  Lance 2013).
 
The complete and balanced equation for the 
production of glucose by photosynthesis, within a 
living system without which nothing can happen, 
thus includes an extra constituent. The destination 
of the atoms of the water molecules taking part in 
6CO2 + 12 H2O  + light energy & living system → 
C6H12O6 + 6O2 + 6H2O
Glucose
By converting into moles (molecule-grammes, 
according to chemists' terminology), it is possible to 
illustrate the flows of matter by weight (in grammes), 
with indication of the energy required (in kilo-
Joules):
6 Mol CO2 + 12 Mol H2O + light & life →
1 Mol C6H12O6 + 6 Mol O2 + 6 Mol H20
264 g
180 g
216 g
192 g
2897 kJ
108 g
Figure 1 also presents the values corresponding to 
the synthesis of wood, originally based on glucose, 
but characterised by a slightly different formula used 
by physiologists (Zimmer and Wegener, 1996). Some 
remarkable facts emerge from this new vision of the 
process:
•  For each dry tonne of wood made by the 
tree, a mass of 1.851 tonnes of gaseous CO2 
is removed from the atmosphere, reducing 
by that amount the greenhouse effect and 
global warming which preoccupy humanity 
at present. We have here a 'carbon sink', 
persisting as long as the wood is not burned 
or decomposed releasing an analogous 
quantity of CO2 into the atmosphere. It 
will therefore be important in the future 
to incorporate wood on a long-term basis 
either into buildings as a material or into 
soils in order to increase the content of stable 
organic matter.
•  Each anhydrous tonne of wood made by 
the tree is accompanied by a mass of 1.392 
tonnes of newly-formed oxygen, coming 
from the photolysis of water. This represents 
a considerable volume: 973 m3 of pure 
oxygen, or 4,636 m3 mixed at a proportion 
of 21% into the air we breathe to stay alive. 
A rather unorthodox question, coming from 
a quality point of view: Does newly-formed 
oxygen of this kind, entering the biosphere 
for the first time in this form, have different 
properties from “old” oxygen? Could this 
possibly be one of the reasons why forest 
air has always been felt to be particularly 
beneficial to health?
•  Each anhydrous tonne of wood made by 
E. Zürcher

77
the tree is accompanied by a mass of 541 kilos 
of newly-formed water. As for the preceding 
component, we have here perfectly pure 
water, which has never before entered into 
the great cycle “evapotranspiration – cloud 
formation – condensation / precipitation – 
running-off / percolating – accumulation – 
resurgence”. It is likely that this new water 
soaks the green parts of the plants and 
circulates with the elaborated (phloem) sap 
down to their lower organs, contributing to 
their growth. Here too arises the question 
of qualities, properties or specific virtues 
of such water, especially given the many 
forms of pollution to which the external 
water cycle is subjected. Such a question 
can be placed in a modern scientific debate, 
very controversial at the outset, but finding 
more and more renowned defenders: that 
of the 'memory of water', as developed by 
pioneers such as Jacques Benveniste, Xy 
Vinh Luu, Marc Henry, Luc Montagnier or 
Gerald Pollack. We should mention here, to 
underline the credibility of the protagonists 
and the importance of the subject, that 
Professor Luc Montagnier received the 
Nobel Prize for Medicine in 2008.
TREES AND THE LATEST FINDINGS 
ABOUT WATER
 
The emergence of a new understanding of 
water allows us to adjust our view of the structures 
and functioning of trees. A chance observation 
made in a Japanese laboratory followed by a series 
of experiments starting at the beginning of this 
century has led to a progressive confirmation of a 
hitherto-unknown property of water. In the presence 
of hydrophilic membranes (natural or synthetic) and 
over a distance reaching sometimes several tenths 
of a millimetre, water acquires a state which seems 
both liquid and solid at once, a fact which suggested 
to the discoverer, a researcher and professor of 
bioengineering already well-known for his book 
'Cells, Gels and the Engines of Life (Pollack 2001), 
the expressions of 'exclusion zones, EZ' (EZ water / 
linked to its particularly pure state) and 'fourth phase 
of water'. in addition to the solid, liquid and vapour 
phases. The research on the subject which continues 
to this day has recently received a coherent overall 
structure in the form of a publication which did 
not go unnoticed by the scientific community: 'The 
Fourth Phase of Water – Beyond solid, liquid and 
vapor' (Pollack 2013).
 
The anatomical structures of plants and 
trees in particular, composed of a complex system of 
membranes and cells with hydrophilic walls showing 
dielectric properties (as postulated by Pollack) and 
the mechanisms of transport of water towards the 
crown and the metabolism linked to photosynthesis 
can, through this new concept, be interpreted more 
precisely. It should be mentioned that this water close 
to hydrophilic membranes can be distinguished from 
'normal' water by many criteria such as level of purity, 
pH, viscosity, refraction index, the absorption of light 
energy, electrical charge, oxygen content or again the 
formation of a supramolecular network.
 
The formation of 'new' water resulting from 
photosynthesis, in addition to the carbohydrates 
and oxygen, thus gains additional significance, 
since it occurs within complex membrane systems, 
corresponding to the criteria of formation of water of 
the 'EZ' type. The fact that this new water takes 89% 
of its mass from part of the oxygen of the atmospheric 
CO2 is already remarkable in itself, making the 
plant – and in a particular way the tree – both a 
consumer and a producer of water. It is recognised 
that carbohydrates and oxygen are necessary for life. 
We may now ask whether new water with its special 
properties (which still need analysing) might not also 
be of fundamental importance.
Figure 1. Complete general equation of photosynthesis, with an 
indication of the destination of components (above) and average 
proportions accepted for wood, with indication of weight ratios 
compared to the dry matter of wood, according to Zimmer and 
Wegener (1996) (below) [drawing D. Rambert]. 
Water in Trees - An essay on astonishing processes, structures and periodicities

78
upward direction is fulfilled in conifers by tracheids 
of earlywood (formed in the spring and the beginning 
of summer) containing many bordered pits. The 
latter represent the points where water passes from 
one cell to its neighbour during its flow towards the 
crown, site of photosynthesis. Comparatively, the 
tracheids of late wood (formed towards the end of the 
vegetative period) possess a much thicker cell wall 
endowed with fewer pits; their function is no longer 
conducting raw sap, but primarily the support of the 
whole structure. The functioning of a bordered pit, a 
local cell wall modification essential to the security 
of the conduction system, is presented in Figure 2: 
we have here an efficient and 'ingenious' system, a 
characteristic component of the functional anatomy 
of conifers.
 
Compared to conifers, the anatomy of broad-
leaved trees is much more complex, with its forms 
STRUCTURES
A functional approach / Xylem as water conducting 
system
 
The function of conducting water requires 
bringing water from the root system to the crown, 
where the assimilation takes place. This occurs 
through a conducting system made of cells called 
tracheids in conifers and connecting alignments 
of cells called vessels in broadleaved species. The 
first engineering problem is: How to bring cold 
water (heavy) up to the high parts exposed to heat, 
sometimes more than 100 metres for the largest trees? 
How can the physical law of gravity be overcome?
 
The solution is proposed by the physiologists 
with the 'theory of cohesion – tension': Water is sucked 
up, with its diluted mineral salts, along the cellular 
channels by the 'negative pressure' resulting from the 
foliar transpiration of the tree (Zimmermann 1989; 
Koch et al. 2004; Johnson 2013). To go beyond the 
critical height of 10 metres (linked to the atmospheric 
pressure), the water must contain absolutely no gas 
bubbles and thus have access to the totality of its 
internal cohesive forces (which allow, for example, 
two glass plates to stick together). This state of liquid 
purity is made possible in conifers by bordered pits. 
These are mobile contact structures between a tracheid 
and its neighbour with an effect simultaneously of 
valve and sieve in order to avoid any embolism due to 
air bubbles which could accumulate. This system of 
water transport with special specifications functions 
at the periphery of the bole's section, in the xylem, the 
living part of the wood characterised by bio-electric 
fields. Gerald Pollack's recent discovery (mentioned 
above) reveals that water running through tracheids 
or vessels the most directly in contact with the 
hydrophilic cell wall acquires a particular structure 
('liquid crystals') and unexpected physical, chemical 
and electrical properties, probably essential to the 
physiological exploits of trees. Running through 
capillary systems allows the water to stay liquid 
down to low temperatures, around – 15°C for 
certain species, instead of damaging the structures 
by the formation of ice crystals in winter. As for the 
electrophysiologists, they observe that the differences 
in electrical potential generated by the living tissues 
stimulate the flow of raw sap. These observations 
follow on logically from old experiments testing the 
effect of such potentials on the movement of water in 
glass capillaries (Maag 1928).
 
This function of conducting water in an 
Figure 2. Diagramme of the workings of a bordered pit: 
when functioning normally (top), the water skirts the central 
impermeable zone of the shared membrane and enters the 
neighbouring tracheid; in the case of a wound with air bubbles 
(accidental entry of air), the relative increase in pressure causes 
the membrane to be flattened, by suction, against the inside of the 
opposite pit (bottom), blocking the flow of water in the damaged 
part [modifies after Zimmermann 1983]. The recent discoveries 
about water encourage the supposition that this forced passage 
through the fibrillar weave of the peripheral membrane confer 
on the water an additional proportion in the 'cristalline-liquid' 
phase with high viscosity and lowered freezing point, an essential 
characteristic for species growing in cold regions.
E. Zürcher

79
of functional specialisation. Depending on the tree 
species, we find generally two types of arrangement 
of vessels: in porous zones in the case of a marked 
contrast between early and late wood, or in diffuse 
pores, when the vessels are of practically constant 
diameter, spread regularly over the whole of the 
annual ring.
Spirality and the Golden Ratio
 
The helical arrangement observed in the 
needles of a young Scots Pine shoot follows a general 
principle of pronounced geometrical nature, which 
Goethe (1749 – 1832) considered as fundamental 
and called “spiral tendency, which reigns in Nature”, 
and which is always found in combination with the 
“vertical tendency”. It was shown by a philosopher 
and naturalist from Geneva, Charles Bonnet (1720 
– 1793), that the position of leaves or needles along 
a stem (subject of phyllotaxy, Fig.2) or the structure 
of a fir-cone or pine-cone, or indeed that of a thistle 
flower head, follow a series of crossed spirals. These 
are subject to a particular relationship: the Golden 
Ratio. This ratio, originally defined by Euclid (325 
– 265 BC), is found among others in the famous 
number sequence developed by Leonard of Pisa, also 
called Fibonacci (approx. 1170 – 1250) :
1 – 1 – 2 – 3 – 5 – 8 – 13 – 21 – 34 – 55 – 89 – 144 - … ,
where each element is the sum of the two preceding 
ones. This series allows the constitution of a set of 
rational ratios 2/1, 3/2, 5/3, 8/5, 13/8, ... 144/89, ... , 
which tend towards the number Phi ( ф ) = 1.61803 
… . Similarly, the series 1/2, 2/3, 3/5, 5/8, … etc. 
converges towards the number phi (ϕ) = 0.61803… 
(ϕ = ф - 1). A cone of the Scots Pine (Pinus sylvestris) 
observed from its base shows an arrangement of 
scales (also called bracts) according to two spiral 
systems: a group of 13 rightward (clockwise) spirals 
and a group of 8 leftward (anti-clockwise) spirals. An 
Eastern White (Weymouth) Pine (Pinus strobus) is 
also formed according to the Golden Ratio, but with 
a ratio of 8/5. These arrangements are illustrated by 
the example of a Maritime Pine in Fig.3. Analysis 
of a specimen of Spear thistle (Cirsium vulgare), 
an annual plant, shows the seeds on a dried head 
to be arranged according to a double spiral system 
with a ratio of 26/16, which can also be written 
13*2 / 8*2, thus is part of the Fibonacci series. 
Interestingly  -  and to make a link with the 2019 
International Year of the Periodic Table of Chemical 
Elements – the elements of the Mendeleyev’s table 
can be geometrically arranged according to a spiral 
Figure 3. Cone of a Maritime pine (Pinus pinaster) growing in 
the western Mediterranean (above), showing an arrangement of 
the scales according to two series of spirals with a ratio 13 / 8 
(below).
following the Fibonacci pattern (Morton 1977).  
 
Where Life surges up
 
Usually (as was the case in Figure 3), the 
right-handed and left-handed spiral patterns (also 
called parastiches) are counted from the base either 
clockwise or anti-clockwise, which corresponds to an 
upwards direction for the axis of the cone or for the 
stem carrying leaves or buds.
 
But we could also consider, like the famous 
Austrian forester-hydrologist Viktor Schauberger 
(1885-1958), that in the genesis of plant organs, series 
of upward spirals cross downward spirals. In his 
vision of the living world, he talks of female upward 
energies which are fertilised by male downward 
energies moving in the opposite direction. In 
practice, the axillary buds arranged along the shoot 
and the seeds developing at the receptacle or along 
the axis of the cone (at the base of the scales) could 
be understood as germs of life appearing within a 
“flow – counterflow” system according to the precise 
mathematical-geometrical ratios of the Golden 
Ratio. In a conception of the plant as interacting with 
the astronomical rhythms modulating among others 
Water in Trees - An essay on astonishing processes, structures and periodicities

80
into the sapwood at the base of the trunk, some 
physiologists (see Bosshard 1974; Harris 1989 on this 
subject) found that the upward flow of raw sap does 
not occur in a straight line, but in a manner which is 
generally helical, in a progression around the axis of 
the tree. According to the species, but also according 
to their growth conditions, five ways of transporting 
water up to the branches were described, of which 
four were clearly not straight, in the form of upward 
spirals turning towards the right, or towards the left, 
or even swinging from one direction to the other 
(Fig. 5). These flows are linked to the anatomical 
structure of the wood, presenting a 'spiral grain', 
with conducting cells deviating from the axis to a 
greater or lesser extent, including radical changes in 
direction during the change from juvenile to adult 
status in many conifers. These phenomena serve to 
guarantee that each root can provide water to each 
branch or nearly, with priority given to the apex, the 
most essential part of the crown.
 
An analogous experiment remains to be 
carried out with the downward flow in the phloem: 
will we find downward spirals in the opposite 
direction?
 
This elucidation of the upward flow of raw 
sap using dye solutions injected at the base of the 
stem showed the paths to the crown were not direct 
gravitational forces, these germs of life would thus 
appear at the points where terrestrial and cosmic 
'force lines' meet and cross-fertilise (Fig. 4).
Viktor Schauberger (1885 – 1958)
 
Austrian forester remaining voluntarily 
outside university circles, Viktor Schauberger 
was a hydrologist and inventor who stupefied the 
technical and academic circles of his time. His first 
achievement was making channels for floating wood 
of a revolutionary type, seeming to defy the laws 
of physics of the time. A great observer of natural 
phenomena, he explored the diverse properties of 
water and drew from them technical applications 
including regeneration systems. He saw water as 
the basis not only of all life, but also of the whole 
of the 'terrestrial consciousness'. His thoughts and 
discoveries led him to direct applications in forestry, 
agriculture and hydrology (waterways, dams, 
vitalising water, organisation of forest areas). He 
designed an ecology in symbiosis with nature well 
before the contemporary approach (Alexandersson 
2002; Bartholomew 2014).
 
This concept of special places for life to surge 
up where two flows meet can also be applied to the 
first cambial cells sharing the conducting bundles of 
young stems, and to the widened 'secondary' cambium 
forming a closed cylindrical generating layer, in 
charge of the growth in thickness of the trunk: both 
are placed exactly between the upward xylem flow (in 
the wood) of raw sap and the downward phloem flow 
of phloem sap.
Vortex flows revealed
 
By means of injections of liquid colourings 
Figure 4. Left: diagrammatic representation of two “energy flows 
(male downwards / female upwards)” intersecting in a helical 
fashion (in Coats 1996). Right: Spatial arrangement of the seed 
location at the intersections of the spiral patterns characteristic 
of the species; the seed represent dormant meristematic points, 
destined to develop as new specimen. Drawing D. Rambert.
Figure 5. Ascent of dye solutions in stems of standing trees, after 
injections radially at the base of the stem. A: sectorial straight;  B: 
sectorial winding;  C: interlocked;  D: spiral turning left;  E: spiral 
turning right (In Harris 1989, after Vité 1967).
E. Zürcher

81
generally ignored or underestimated. Indeed, we 
should think of this material as a dense tissue of 
organic matter saturated with water by forces and 
to an extent which fluctuate in a cyclic manner. The 
behaviour when drying (loss of water, shrinkage) 
and the resulting final density, as well as mechanical 
resistance (to compression for example) and even 
resistance to decomposing agents such as fungi or 
insects, will all be influenced one way or the other by 
the date of harvesting.
Traditional practices which are still very much alive
 
Still today, maxims about felling linked to 
the moon are applied by certain workers of wood. 
An interesting fact: these rules come from traditions 
which persist in many regions of the world where 
links remain with ancestral culture. Here we will 
not deal with the multiple “lunar calendars”, very 
trendy nowadays, covering numerous areas fairly 
comprehensively, without any experimental basis. 
The examples which follow concern cases known 
directly to the author, or taken from scientifically 
documented sources; their aim is to illustrate the 
great variety of uses of wood for which the moon 
factor is considered important for obtaining certain 
exceptional properties. It should be pointed out that 
in most cases this factor comes only in second or 
third position, the most important being in general 
the time of year, with a high value placed on “winter 
wood”, and the situation in terms of the growing 
conditions, mountain wood from slow-growing 
natural forest stands being particularly appreciated. 
Sometimes winds are mentioned, such as the Foehn 
in the Alps, which could negatively impact certain 
properties of the wood.
Large-scale research
 
In order to tackle the question more 
fundamentally and with a large data base, a new 
trial was carried out simultaneously on 4 sites in 
Switzerland, with 48 successive fellings (each Monday 
and each Thursday) – not linked to any experimental 
hypothesis – of 3 trees per site over 5 ½ months, 
representing a total of more than 600 trees felled over 
the winter of 2003-2004 (Zürcher et al. 2010). The 
species were Spruce (Picea abies) and Sweet Chestnut 
(Castanea sativa). Before the beginning of the 
experiment, a reference sample was taken the same 
day from each of the trees which were later felled (a 
Figure 6. The clematis (Clematis vitalba) is a woody plant which 
is not self-supporting, belonging to the group of lianas, which 
have the highest-known speeds of transport of the raw sap. A 
maximum of 222 metres per hour was measured by Kucera and 
Bossard (1981). The strongly helical structure of the vessel walls 
probably plays here an essential role (Photo T. Volkmer).
but helical (in a vortex) compared to the axis of 
the trunk. An interesting similarity underlining 
the coherence of biological systems: the flow of 
blood in the large vessels and in the human heart, 
studied using Doppler echocardiography and 
cardiac magnetic resonance, also form vortexes 
(Day 1998; Sengupta et al. 2012; Caro et al. 2013). In 
the more recent development of research on water, 
based on the discovery of a “fourth phase of water', 
particularly in contact with organic hydrophilic 
membranes, the part played by vortex flows appears 
in a new light. One of the particularities is that the 
vortexes increase the oxygenation of the water and its 
amount of energy-rich hydrogen bonds (Ignatov et 
al. 2015). Simultaneously, the emission of energy by 
radiation is reduced, while significantly decreasing 
the temperature when before and after vortexing is 
compared (Pollack 2013). This last feature had been 
discovered by Viktor Schauberger mentioned above, 
who considered it very important for the health of 
'biological systems' such as trees or even waterways. 
Figure 6 may illustrate the phenomenon at the 
anatomical level.
PERIODICITIES  
Chronobiological studies on Felling dates of trees and 
properties of wood related to water
 
The exact moment when a tree is felled 
to harvest the wood, or simply the moment when 
samples are taken, has an importance which is 
Water in Trees - An essay on astonishing processes, structures and periodicities

82
Drying wood felled around the Full Moon
 
In the Spruce samples (Picea abies; sapwood 
and perfect wood together), a systematic and 
statistically significant variation of water loss is 
detectable. This fluctuation occurs according to the 
synodic lunar cycle on felling, subdivided into 8 
periods of 3.7 days, beginning with the moment of 
the New Moon. The most marked variations occur 
during the passage from the period preceding the 
Full moon (high water loss) to the one beginning 
with the Full moon (minimal water loss) then the 
one preceding the Last quarter (high water loss). [ 
Zürcher et al. 2010 ]
 
The statistical analysis indicates unexpectedly 
not only rhythms of a synodic type, but also a marked 
sidereal rhythmicity. Scientific research is thus able 
to affirm that behind the 'lunar' phytopractices of 
foresters resides a kernel of objective observations. 
This the case both for synodic lunar phases (the cycle 
New Moon – Full Moon linked to the position of 
our satellite relative to the Sun) and for the sidereal 
cycle (position of the Moon compared to fixed 
constellations), also mentioned in a roundabout and 
somewhat curious way in certain felling rules. Note 
that these results, while confirming the existence 
of the 'Moon' factor as mentioned in country lore, 
appear in a much more complex form than imagined 
at the start of this research, Theophrastus's rule 
seeming to be very close to the synodic phenomena 
observed in Spruce.
Focus on a representative site
 
The systematic variations over the course of 
the synodic lunar month can be illustrated in another 
fashion with the graph of variation around the 
general mean of this same criterion 'water loss' for 
the 48 successive felling dates, using a representative 
series: the sapwood samples of the site of Château-
d'Oex (Zürcher et al. 2012). This material is relatively 
homogeneous because all the trees are of the same 
age, belonging to an even-age-managed mountain 
forest deriving from a plantation. Figure 8 A shows 
the abrupt change which occurred around the Full 
Moons of November, December and January. Even if 
the February Full Moon is included, where there was 
almost no difference between the values before and 
after the Full Moon, the respective variations around 
the Full Moon for this winter period of four months 
are not insignificant, the general mean indicating a 
reduction in water loss of 4.5%.
prismatic sample at chest level). Each tree provided 
at different points of the trunk a series of samples of 
sapwood and a series of samples of heartwood. The 
drying behaviour of this material was followed under 
standardised laboratory conditions.
 
Among the different rhythmicities first 
observed and then confirmed statistically for three 
principal criteria, let us mention here the water loss, 
which varied systematically in Spruce, particularly 
between the fellings immediately preceding the full 
Moon and those following it. The type of variation 
is probably due not to differences in initial water 
content, but to the fact that the forces binding the 
water to the cell wall of the ligneous tissues could be 
subject to fluctuations. The ratio between the water 
easily extractable from the wood, designated 'free', 
and the water extracted below the saturation point 
of the fibres, or 'bound' water, fluctuates according 
to lunar cycles, and probably also according to the 
seasons, the 'lunar' variations being more marked 
during the period from October to February 
(Zürcher et al. 2012). Moreover, the rhythmicities 
are manifested differently according to the species: 
the Chestnut also shows statistically significant lunar 
variations, but distinct from those of the Spruce.
 
These systematic variations in water loss 
cause a variation in the density of the wood after 
drying: - For the case of Spruce, it confirms what the 
previous studies mentioned had already observed 
(Fig. 7 – lower).
 
Figure 7. Variation of dry (andhydrous) densities of wood 
(sapwood) of Spruce (Picea abies) with felling period and moon 
phases, according to research done in different places and years. 
Upper: Tharandt 1996-97 (Triebel 1998); Freiburg i.Br., 1997-98 
(Seeling and Herz 1998, 2000); Zürich, 1998-99 (Bariska and 
Rösch 2000) / lower: Château-d’Oex 2003-04 (Zürcher et al. 
2012)  Means waxing Moon – waning, resp. Château-d'Oex 2003-
04 around the Full Moon – before / after). Waxing Moon dates 
1, 3, 5, 7; waning Moon dates 2, 4, 6, 8. Similar variations can be 
observed especially in the second half of the trial period, from 
December onwards (4). Reminder: most of the technological 
properties of wood are closely linked to its density.
E. Zürcher

83
Tests of water absorption (after drying)
 
One of wood's most important physical 
properties, decisive for its bad-weather behaviour 
and its resistance to rot, is its hygroscopic nature – a 
very hygroscopic wood is more prone to rot than one 
which is less hygroscopic. This property is generally 
expressed by the equilibrium state in a given 
atmosphere, with a given temperature and relative 
humidity. When they are completely waterlogged, 
the cell walls are in a state designated 'fibre saturation 
point', below which the loss of bound water 
following the drying process causes deformations 
(shrinkage). The test method chosen for estimating 
the hygroscopic variations due to felling date was 
to expose the samples to a direct contact with water 
(Zürcher et al. 2012). A series of measurements was 
made using small rods from felled trees, previously 
air-dried under controlled conditions. They were all 
fixed (12 x 48 = 576 samples per site) by one end to a 
slab, the other end being immerged over a length of 
5mm for 9 minutes in a bowl of water with ink as a 
dye. Figure 8 B shows the variations in absorption of 
water by capillarity in the samples taken during this 
experimental period. Both the limitation of the lunar 
effect to the 4 winter months and the systematic and 
marked decrease in water absorption directly after 
the Full Moon are very similar to what was observed 
concerning initial water loss described above at 
Figure 8 A. It is noteworthy that for the reabsorption 
of water by capillarity, the mean amplitude of the 
decrease (25.9%) for the samples taken just after the 
Full Moon is comparatively much more pronounced 
than for water loss and is evident even for February.
 
The second test method for quantifying the 
degree of hygroscopicity was applied by immersion 
of samples previously used for the determination 
of the density. In the same way, 576 cubic samples 
for each site (4 per tree, 12 for the felling date) were 
immersed in water at 20°C for 7 days. The absorption 
is expressed in this case as the percentage increase 
in mass. There too, systematic lunar variations in 
hygroscopicity occur, in obvious coherence with the 
loss of water. For the four months from November 
to February, the mean reduction between the days 
before the Full Moon and the days immediately after 
is 12.6%, half the value obtained for absorption of 
water by capillarity.
 
These results show us that the reversible 
variations linked to the Moon are not limited to 
the loss of water and the relative density (and 
shrinkage) in the course of drying: the phenomenon 
is even more marked for the absorption of water (by 
Figure 8 A. Variation of water loss during drying of Spruce (Picea 
abies) samples, comparing the felling dates occurring in the 3.5 
days running up to the Full Moon (vVM), with those of felling 
occurring during the 3.5 days after the Full Moon (nVM), for 
the months of November 2003 (1), December (2), January 2004 
(3) and February (4). The samples from before the Full Moon 
of November, December and January lost slightly more water 
than those from fellings performed after the Full Moon. Values 
calculated from the general mean.
Figure 8 B. Variation of capillary water absorption by the 
dried Spruce (Picea abies) samples, comparing the felling dates 
occurring in the 3.5 days running up to the Full Moon (vVM), 
with those of felling occurring during the 3.5 days after the Full 
Moon (nVM), for the months of November 2003 (1), December 
(2), January 2004 (3) and February (4). The samples from before 
the Full Moon of November, December, January and February 
absorbed considerably more water than those coming from 
fellings performed after the Full Moon. Values calculated from 
the general mean.
capillarity and by immersion) of previously dried 
wood samples. It should however be pointed out that 
these hygroscopic variations linked to the lunar cycles 
are much weaker than the differences due to the site 
and the type of forestry, since Spruce samples from 
a naturally-regenerating mountain forest show much 
lower water absorption than those from a plantation.
 
These encouraging results have to be 
confirmed by tests of durability before definitive 
conclusions can be made about Spruce wood for 
outdoor use. It could nevertheless be expected that 
differences in the resistance to decay of Spruce wood 
might follow the following rule: “low durability of 
wood cut not long before the full moon, because very 
hygroscopic; higher durability of less hygroscopic 
wood cut immediately after the full moon between 
November and February” - which would correspond 
Water in Trees - An essay on astonishing processes, structures and periodicities

84
 
It seems to us more and more obvious, as 
has been mentioned several times, that this basis 
is none other than the essential element for every 
organic process: water. This was the direction of the 
conclusions of researchers working on the cyclic 
variations of certain chemical reactions in aqueous 
medium in controlled laboratory conditions, such as 
Giorgio, Piccardi, Joseph Eichmeier or Soco Tromp. 
We should mention also the work of Vladimir Voeikov 
and Emilio Del Giudice (2009) on the fluctuations of 
water in its electronic charge and its capacity to react 
with oxygen, bringing them to the concept of “ water 
respiration”.
 
Already in the 1920s, experiments had been 
performed on the variations in surface tension of 
water using extremely fine glass capillary tubes, 
where the frequency of drop formation was observed 
(Maag 1928). They demonstrated lunar rhythmicities 
(monthly, but also daily) appearing as soon as the 
capillaries became fine enough, showing then the 
effect of certain planetary conjunctions. Meanwhile, 
it was observed that when it is in capillary systems, 
either of glass or organic like plant cells (with their 
vacuole and their partially porous membrane), water 
undergoes an important change in its properties, 
like for example the ability to remain liquid at 
temperatures as low as – 15°C. It would be interesting 
to analyse again the effect of the 'time' factor on 
these essential properties of water using modern 
technologies.
 
A relatively recent double publication in 
theoretical physics by Gerhard Dorda (2004), co-
author with von Klitzing of the discovery of the 
“Hall Quantum Effect”, winner of the Nobel Prize for 
Physics 1985, puts forward a new astro-geophysical 
model of the role of gravitation in living processes. 
This model integrates static and dynamic aspects of 
gravitation according to the orbital movement of 
celestial bodies, leads to a 'quantisation' of gravitation 
and of time, and demonstrates a reversible effect 
linked to the Sun on one hand and to the Moon on 
the other, on the supra-molecular structure of water. 
This model leads to the determination of reversible 
states of aggregation or coherence ('clusters') of 
water, in a quantitative ratio of a considerable size, 
from 1 to 2200, according to whether the interaction 
involved is Sun-Earth or Moon-Earth, the latter 
being modulated by the lunar day, but also according 
to the waxing/waning phase. Dorda considers that 
this rhythmic fluctuation of water in a system with 
3 celestial bodies, constitutes the biological clock 
sought up to now in organic structures. This model 
was validated independently thanks to experimental 
to the oldest documented rule, written by the Greek 
naturalist Theophrastus (371 – 287 b.C), stipulating 
that the best construction timber is obtained when 
trees are felled in winter, in the first days after full 
moon. Indeed, it is well known that woods whose 
fibres can be highly saturated by water are more 
easily attacked by fungi and xylophagous insects than 
woods with a comparatively low saturation level of 
their cell walls.
Implications and perspectives concerning periodicities
This insight into lunar cycles detected in the plant 
world, and in particular in trees and their wood, 
shows a real phenomenon, which is additional to 
the exogenous rhythms of mostly solar origin whose 
action is well known, both on a daily and a seasonal 
level, and linked over the longer term to the cycle of 
sunspot activity, varying over an 11 year period. The 
Moon modulates this principal exogenous rhythm 
on an hourly basis, through the gravimetric tides 
occurring with two high and two low tides per day, as 
well as over the week and the lunar month, according 
to the synodic, tropical, sidereal or anomalistic 
(perigee and apogee) cycle. It seems that the lunar 
rhythms become apparent when the influence of 
the sun is reduced, either naturally or due to an 
experimental set-up.
 
What kind of forces are involved here? Where 
the synodic and anomalistic rhythms are concerned, 
the gravitational force causing tides is too weak to 
explain even a tiny part of the lunar phenomena 
observed in plants: it is not more than 0.08 millionths 
of the force exerted by gravity on a mass situated at 
the surface of the Earth.
 
For the largest tree measured in Europe, 
described by Klein in 1908, a Silver Fir Abies alba in 
the Black Forest (height 68m, diameter 380cm, bole 
volume 140 m3, weight estimated at 100 t), the tidal 
(gravitational) lunar force represents a light daily pull 
then relaxation of 8 grammes only – the weight of 
two sugar lumps!
 
The variations of the geomagnetic field, 
weak but distinct, with a period of half a lunar day 
(12 hours 25 minutes), due to the gravimetric tides, 
present a similar situation.
 
The French chronobiologist Lucien Baillaud 
(2004) points out quite rightly: “Where the moon is 
concerned, the supporter […] wants to be shown the 
basis of the link between the Moon and the living 
being, with a breakdown of how the phenomena fit 
together – or at least wishes us to suggest a hypothesis.
E. Zürcher

85
their own rain. Be it above the Amazonian tropical 
forest or boreal coniferous forests, the formation 
of clouds and the rainfall that follows happen 
thanks to a form of 'seeding' by micro-particles of 
organic origin. The gaseous substances given off by 
the trees, volatile organic compounds, undergo a 
photochemical condensation caused by light and 
behave as 'cloud condensation nuclei'. Mushroom 
spores, pollen grains and microscopic vegetable 
debris which are also given off into the atmosphere 
have the same effect (Pöschl et al. 2010;  Ehn et al. 
2014). It is then easy to imagine that the rain regime 
could dramatically change if the forest cover should 
be reduced, not only because of then lacking “cloud 
producers”, but also because of the absence of “rain 
provokers”.
 
In his description of the geoclimatic role 
of the Amazonian forest, Peter Bunyard (editor 
of the British journal The Ecologist, 2015) draws 
attention to the new geoclimatic model developed by 
Victor Gorshkov and Anastassia Makarieva, of the 
Department of Theoretical Physics of the Institute 
of Unclear Physics of Saint-Petersburg (2007, 2014). 
The analysis of the climatological and hydrological 
data leads them to the conclusion that it is not the 
movement of air masses which set off the hydrological 
cycle (the generally accepted model up to now), but 
on the contrary the changes in phase of the water 
in the atmosphere above forests which bring about 
the movement of air masses. Indeed, water needs 
considerable energy to evaporate from forests (around 
600 calories per gramme, depending on temperature 
and atmospheric pressure), and it returns this energy 
as heat in the high atmosphere when it condenses 
to form rain. Thus, the extreme impact of solar 
radiation around the equator is absorbed, thanks to 
the ecosystems rich in water and biomass found in 
the zones of the globe. In parallel, the rapidity of the 
condensation process compared to the slowness of 
the evapo-transpiration creates a pressure difference 
with a suction effect. The Amazonian forest thus 
acts like a gigantic hydrological heart ('biotic 
pump'), attracting air masses from the Atlantic and 
enriching them in water, performing half a dozen 
cycles of evapo-transpiration – precipitation, moving 
from East to West, and finally rising in the Andes 
and moving north (Central and North America) 
and south (Argentina) giving rise to warm rains in 
latitudes far from the equator. The tropical forests 
can therefore be seen as components of the biosphere 
ensuring both the functioning and the stability of 
the great geoclimatic water cycle. In this context, 
the researchers bring to light another essential 
measurements already published by Mario Cantiani 
et al. (1994) and interpreted in keeping with lunar 
chronobiology by E. Zürcher, M.-G. Cantiani, F. 
Sorbetti-Guerri and D. Michel in 1998.
 
Martial Rossignol and his colleagues, 
some years before (1990), highlighted the role of 
electromagnetic phenomena linked to lunar cycles 
(polarisation of light, modulation of wavelength, 
ionisation of the atmosphere, atmospheric pressure) 
and considered a possible link with the induction of 
bio-electric potentials at the cell level.
 
Not long after, in 2004, Philippe Vallée 
devised a new experimental method for proving in 
a reproducible manner that weak, low-frequency 
electromagnetic fields have a durable effect on water. 
This researcher stresses the importance of interfaces 
between water and its solid or gaseous inclusions: 
an essential aspect, since interfacial water plays a 
fundamental role in the organic world.
 
And now, a new scientific sensation has just 
come out, and brings an essential component to 
reinforce the hypotheses formulated here: 'The Fourth 
phase of Water' (Pollack 2013). The discovery and the 
demonstration of a “liquid crystal” phase of water in 
contact with hydrophilic membranes with dielectrical 
properties (wood corresponds to these criteria) 
allows Pollack to explain a whole series of 'anomalies' 
of water which were until now unexplained, and to 
open horizons beyond expectation. 
 
All these discoveries and interpretations 
on a purely physical level do not however provide a 
reply to the question of why differences are observed 
between certain living plant species, both annual 
and woody, in their physiological reactions to lunar 
cycles and the behaviour of their wood. Indeed, 
trials on germination and initial growth have shown 
that simultaneously growing plants of different 
species are actually impacted by the factor “Moon”, 
but in counterphase, some species being positively 
stimulated of days before the New Moon, while 
others start their growth better in days before Full 
Moon (Zürcher 1992).
ENDANGERED GLOBAL CONTEXT
 
The described processes, structures and 
periodicities probably play a major role in the water 
cycles activated by forests, especially in equatorial 
zones. The last ones are probably of much higher 
existential importance for the life on earth than 
commonly admitted.
 
Trees produce clouds, but forests make also 
Water in Trees - An essay on astonishing processes, structures and periodicities

86
Pullinen I, Springer M, Rubach F, Tillmann R, Lee 
B, Lopez-Hilfiker F, Andres S, Acir IH, Rissanen 
M, Jokinen T, Schobesberger S, Kangasluoma 
J, Kontkanen J, Nieminen T, Kurtén T, Nielsen 
LB, Jørgensen S, Kjaergaard HG, Canagaratna 
M, Maso MD, Berndt T, Petäjä T, Wahner A, 
Kerminen VM, Kulmala M, Worsnop DR, Wildt 
J, Mentel TF. (2014): A large source of low-
volatility secondary organic aerosol. Nature, 
2014 Feb 27; 506 (7489): 476-9.
Harris, J.M. (1989): Spiral Grain and Wave Phenomena 
in Wood Formation. Springer, New York   
Ignatov, I., Mosin, O. and Bauer, E. (2015): Vortex 
Power 
Spring 
Water: 
Physical-Chemical 
Qualities of this Water compared to Mountain 
and Melt Water from Bulgaria, Russia and 
Glacier Rosenlaui from Swiss Alps. Advances in 
Physics Theories and Applications, Vol.45, 2015  
Johnson, B. (2013): The Ascent of Sap in Tall Trees: a 
Possible Role for Electrical Forces. Water 5, 86 – 
104, Nov. 2013.
Koch, G.W., Sillett, S.C., Jennings, G.M., Davis, S.D. 
(2004): "The limits to tree height", Nature 428, 22 
April 2004, pp. 851 - 854
Kucera, L.J., Bosshard, H.H. (1981) : Die Waldrebe 
- Clematis vitalba L.  VieIteljahrsschrift der 
Naturforschenden Gesellschaft in Zürich (1981) 
126/l: 51-71 
Lance, C. (2013) : Respiration et photosynthèse - 
Histoire et secrets d'une équation. Edp sciences, 
Grenoble
Maag, G. (1928): Planeteneinflüsse, West-Ost-Verlag, 
Konstanz
Makarieva A.M., Gorshkov V.G., Sheil D., Nobre 
A.D., Bunyard P., Li B.-L. (2014) Why does air 
passage over forest yield more rain? Examining 
the coupling between rainfall, pressure, and 
atmospheric moisture content. Journal of 
Hydrometeorology, 15, 411-426.
Makarieva, A.M.,  Gorshkov, V.G. (2007): Biotic 
pump of atmospheric moisture as driver of the 
hydrological cycle on land. Hydrol. Earth Syst. 
Sci., 11, 1013 – 1033, 2007. 
Morton, A.A. (1977): The Fibonacci Series and 
the Periodic Table of Elements. The Fibonacci 
Quarterly Vol.15, Number 2, April 1977
Pollack, G. H.  (2013) : The Fourth Phase of Water 
-  Beyond  solid, liquid and vapor.  Ebner and 
Sons, Seattle, USA
Pollack, G. H. (2001) : Cells, Gels and the Engines of 
Life.  Ebner and Sons, Seattle, USA.
Pöschl U, Martin ST, Sinha B, Chen Q, Gunthe SS, 
Huffman JA, Borrmann S, Farmer DK, Garland 
phenomenon: if a coastal zone is deforested over a 
width of 600 km or more, the masses of humid ocean 
air can no longer move inland, thus condemning 
their forests to perish.
REFERENCES
Alexandersson, O. (2002). Living Water: Viktor 
Schauberger and the Secrets of Natural Energy. 
Gill Books, Dublin, Ireland.
Baillaud, 
L. 
(2004): 
Chronobiologie 
lunaire 
controversée: 
de 
la 
nécessité 
de 
bonnes 
méthodologies. Bulletin du Groupe d’Etude des 
Rythmes Biologiques (35) 3 : 3-16.
Bariska, M., Rösch, P. (2000): Fällzeit und 
Schwindverhalten 
von 
Fichtenholz. 
Schweizerische Zeitschrift für Forstwesen 151 
(2000) 11: 439-443.
Bartholomew, A. (2014) : Le génie de Viktor 
Schauberger. Le Courrier du Livre, Paris
Bosshard, H. H. (1974): Holzkunde, Band 2,  Zur 
Biologie, Physik und Chemie des Holzes. 
Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel und Stuttgart
Bosshard, H.H. (1974): Holzkunde Bd. 2 - Zur 
Biologie, Physik und Chemie des Holzes. 
Birkhäuser-Verlag, Basel  
Bunyard, P. (2015): Without its rainforest, the Amazon 
will turn to desert. The Ecologist, 2nd March 
2015.
Cantiani, M. (†), Cantiani, M.-G., Sorbetti Guerri, F. 
1994: Rythmes d'accroissement en diamètre des 
arbres forestiers. Revue Forestière Française 46: 
349-358.
Caro, C.G., A.Seneviratne, K.B.Heraty, C.Monaco, 
M.G.Burke, R.Krams, C.C.Chang, G.Coppola, 
and P.Gilson (2013). Intimal hyperplasia 
following implantation of helical-centreline 
and straight-centreline stents in common 
carotid arteries in healthy pigs: influence of 
intraluminal flow. J R Soc Interface. 2013 Oct 16; 
10 (89):20130578.
Coats, C. (1996): Living Energies. An Exposition 
of Concepts Related to the Theories of Viktor 
Schauberger. Gateway Books, Bath, U.K.
Day, M. Let the blood run free. New Scientist 158 
(2134):19, May 16, 1998
Dorda, G. (2004): Sun, Earth, Moon  -  the Influence 
of Gravity on the Development of Organic 
Structures. Part II: The Influence of the Moon. 
Sudetendeutsche Akademie der Wissenschaften 
und Künste, München. Bd 25: 29-44.
Ehn M, Thornton JA, Kleist E, Sipilä M, Junninen H, 
E. Zürcher

87
Zürcher, E. (1992): Rythmicites dans la germination 
et la croissance initiale d'une essence forestiere 
tropicale. (Rhythmizitäten in der Keimung und 
im Initialwachstum einer tropischen Baumart)  
Schweizerische Zeitschrift fuer Forstwesen 
(Switzerland) v. 143(12) p. 951-966
Zürcher, E. (2016) : Die Bäume und das Unsichtbare. 
AT-Verlag, Aarau (CH) und München (D)
Zürcher, E. (2016): Les Arbres, emtre Visible et 
Invisible. Actes Sud, Arles (F)
Zürcher, E., Cantiani, M.-G., Sorbetti-Guerri, F., 
Michel, D.  (1998):  Tree stem diameters fluctuate 
with tide. Nature 392: 665-666.
Zürcher, E., Rogenmoser C, Soleimany Kartalaei 
A, Rambert D. (2012): Reversible Variations in 
Some Wood Properties of Norway Spruce (Picea 
abies Karst.), Depending on the Tree Felling 
Date. In: Spruce: Ecology, Management and 
Conservation. Eds. Nowak KI and Strybel HF. 
Nova Science Publishers, Hauppauge, New York 
2012; 75-94.
Zürcher, E., Schlaepfer, R., Conedera, M., Giudici, 
F. (2010): Looking for differences in wood 
properties as a function of the felling date: 
lunar phase-correlated variations in the drying 
behavior of Norway Spruce (Picea abies Karst.) 
and Sweet Chestnut (Castanea sativa Mill.). 
TREES (2010) 24: 31-41.
RM, Helas G, Jimenez JL, King SM, Manzi A, 
Mikhailov E, Pauliquevis T, Petters MD, Prenni 
AJ, Roldin P, Rose D, Schneider J, Su H, Zorn 
SR, Artaxo P, Andreae MO. (2010): Rainforest 
aerosols as biogenic nuclei of clouds and 
precipitation in the Amazon. Science 2010, Sep 
17; 329 (5998):1513-6. 
Ray, P. M. (1972): The Living Plant. (2nd Ed.) Holt, 
Rinehart, and Winston, New York
Rossignol, M., S. Benzine-Tizroutine and L. 
Rossignol.  (1990).  Lunar cycle and nuclear DNA 
variations in potato callus or root meristem. In 
Tomassen, G.J.M., de Graaff, W., Knoop, A. A. 
and Hengeveld, R. (eds), Geo-cosmic relations; 
the earth and its macro-environment. Proceedings 
of the First International Congress on Geo-cosmic 
Relations, April 19-22, 1989, Amsterdam. Pudoc, 
Wageningen, The Netherlands.
Seeling, U. (2000): Ausgewählte Eigenschaften 
des Holzes der Fichte (Picea abies (L.) Karst.) 
in Abhängigkeit vom Zeitpunkt der Fällung. 
Schweizerische Zeitschrift für Forstwesen / 
Journal Forestier Suisse 151 (2000) 11: 451-458.
Seeling, 
U., 
Herz, 
A. 
(1998): 
Einfluss 
des 
Fällzeitpunktes auf das Schwindungsverhalten 
und die Feuchte des Holzes von Fichte (Picea 
abies) - Literaturübersicht und Pilotstudie. 
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität 
Freiburg 
i.Br., 
Institut 
Forstbenutzung 
und 
Forstliche 
Arbeitswissenschaft. Arbeitspapier 2-98 (66p).
Sengupta, P. et al. (2012) : Emerging Trends in CV 
Flow Visualization. JACC - Cardiovascular 
Imaging, Vol.5, No.3 : 305 – 16
Triebel, 
J. 
(1998): 
Mondphasenabhängiger 
Holzeinschlag 
- 
Literaturbetrachtung 
und 
Untersuchung 
ausgewählter 
Eigenschaften 
des Holzes von Fichten (Picea abies Karst.). 
Diplomarbeit, Institut für Forstbenutzung und 
Forsttechnik, TU Dresden (108 p).
Vallée, Ph. (2004): Etude de l’effet de champs 
électromagnétiques basse fréquence sur les 
propriétés physico-chimiques de l’eau. Thèse de 
Doctorat, Université Pierre et Marie Curie (Paris 
VI).
Voeikov, V. L., Del Giudice, E. (2009): Water 
Respiration - The Basis of the Living State. 
WATER 1, 52 - 75, 1 July 2009
Zimmer, B. & Wegener (1996):  Stoff- und 
Energieflüsse vom Forst zum Sägewerk. Holz als 
Roh-und Werkstoff 54 (1996): 217-223.
Zimmermann, M. H. (1983): Xylem Structure and 
the Ascent of Sap. Springer-Verlag, Berlin – 
Heidelberg - New York – Tokyo
Water in Trees - An essay on astonishing processes, structures and periodicities
View publication stats

